most people in china don't believe in
god the question doesn't mean anything
to them
the question is unfamiliar to them the
concept of god
is unfamiliar to them yeah i know some
people may nitpick and
may complain about how simple i make it
seem but it simply is that simple
how is it possible how is it possible
that people are so ignorant about the
history
politics and religion of china
[Music]
let's talk about china what about the
guy in china
in china it doesn't even matter whether
you believe in god or not
the question is completely irrelevant it
wouldn't make sense for an average
chinese person to sit here and to
explain to the chinese people
why he doesn't believe in god because
nobody believes in god people will just
sit and be like why are you telling us
this
most people in china don't believe in
god the question doesn't mean anything
to them
and this is not an active act of
disbelief of
disbelieving you know the question is
unfamiliar to them
the concept of god is unfamiliar to them
they're not discussing whether they do
believe or don't believe in god
the question doesn't exist it's
irrelevant most people in china will
never become muslims and will never
become christians
and will never find the one true god so
why do they exist
how is it conceivable that one religion
is true one god is true
and he expects everybody to seek and
find him
that he expects every chinese person to
seek and find this true religion
to find this true god but most chinese
people
never engage in that so let alone being
successful
they all just live and die without ever
thinking about god
while we are sitting here talking about
whether god exists or not like it is a
universal
existential question because to us this
is an existential question because
we have a history of abrahamic monetary
but they don't which is why it's not
even a trivial question to them
meanwhile according to islam islam is
true and all those people who are born
into islam
will conveniently go to heaven because
they will live as muslims and die as
muslims
even if they don't do anything and no
one has an answer about all those poor
chinese people whom
allah has created or god has created but
that he doesn't seem to care about
yeah i know some people may nitpick and
may complain about how simple i make it
seem
but it simply is that simple what this
man has said to you
is just as absurd as if he told you
that aristotle back in ancient athens
had absolutely no concept of god that if
you
walked up to aristotle and started a
conversation
about faith about whether or not people
believe in god
he'd just have no idea what you were
talking about he just have
no concept now i say aristotle
specifically
rather than the average man on the
street in ancient greece
because in case you haven't heard
aristotle's
speculations about the true nature of
god
were so appealing to christians
they feel that this is so compatible
with their faith
that even though aristotle was a pagan
even though aristotle in terms of
doctrine will end up in
hell and this is addressed in dante's
inferno
by the way um dante it invents a whole
new
concept of uh uh an intermediate state
between if and
hell where people like aristotle go up
but prior to dante's poetry
which is non-canon it's not dante's work
is not considered part of the bible it's
not quite considered the word of god
prior to dante inventing this uh
interregnum state here
uh you know by the way aristotle's in
hell
despite all this christians embraced
aristotle as a church father
as one of the crucial most important
philosophers for the catholic faith and
today i'm really surprised in the united
states
protestants in america they still really
embrace aristotle also see
what he has to say about god is so
compatible
with what they want to hear
how is it possible in the 21st century
that people are still so balefully
ignorant
about china and how is it possible for
this youtuber to just
take his fantasy and project it onto
asia
for you know could be china it could be
india in this case china
in the same way that europeans did not
even in the 19th century this is really
going back
to the 18th century we have a long
history of this pattern playing out
again and again and again now in
china 10 heaven
what you saw on screen there that is
more
like the abstract faceless
concept of god that today is the most
popular idea of god in christianity
judaism
and to my knowledge in islam now you
know
islam covers a large and diverse part of
the world's surface i don't know if
that's the most popular thing about
the muslim god in indonesia for example
but you know certainly the university
educated muslims i've encountered
some from iran and some of the world
they really are thinking of god
in the same terms as this chinese symbol
tien you know not that god is a
particular
person who walks with his feet on the
ground and has
hands and eyes and a face and emotions
not that god can weep or laugh but that
god is this
abstract transcendental
i principle note i once read a
translation uh
into english of one of the very first
books
ever published in the cree language so
cree
nehewen is an indigenous language of
canada
so what most people call american
indians
great term the the native people uh
founded in canada the united states
and this is a christian preacher
explaining to these people the concept
of god
and this was already at a stage where
they'd encountered enough uh
christian missionaries that they had
their own views on this matter
and he's answering objections from them
where they say look
we've read the bible or they've had some
contact with these bibles
in the bible it says things like god has
hands
and god walked from this place that had
met this person like it's describing god
as a physical person on the ground they
could relate to that
right they know what you're saying is
not true and the christian preacher is
is replying back i think he was a jesuit
this guy said no no no
um that's just an allegory no no no
really
god has no hands and no feet he's not a
physical person
this this is this conflict has existed
within uh christianity
at least for centuries um there's a 19th
century german philosopher called max
sterner
and there's one portion he only really
wrote one famous book
he did a few other things but he has
this one famous book called the ego on
its own
which by the way is rollicking um
atheist anti-establishment diatribe
it's completely anti-christian there's
one portion that most people
perceive as being racist against chinese
people
it helps if you read it in german and
not in english by the way
but the real point of that portion of
the book is to ridicule
europeans and among and ridicule
christianity in europe at that time
one thing he says is look the most
sophisticated
philosophies among the christians all
they accomplish
is catching up with the chinese what
you've done
is taken the judeo-christian god who had
a beard and a voice and hands and feet
and
interacts like a he's a superhero
originally in the older parts of the old
testament
the same way zeus is a kind of superhero
you've taken him
and transformed him or reinterpreted him
into ten
he says i remember he says you worship
ten
the god of the chinese you know this
more abstract principle of
heaven ruling earth right now there may
be a lot of things wrong with the
philosophy of max turner and it may
there may even be some racism in there
don't get me wrong um
he talks about the mongolism of
europeans that
that europe emerged from the dark ages
only to become
mongolians ourselves in trying to catch
up with the sophistication of chinese
culture
so if you read that as racist still the
point is satirical to really
take a poke at the pretensions that
europeans have to being superior
to the chinese um the point is here
aristotle he does have this abstract
monotheistic
concept normally in english we say the
godhead of kind of the one true god this
very abstract god
but of course aristotle also has a
polytheistic concept of
of many gods with particular names of
particular people like
zeus and and what have you zeus and then
getting into demigods like
uh heracles hercules you know the uh
colorful
cast of superheroes that people in
ancient greece uh
were more familiar with and household
gods or what have you
now today in hinduism modern hinduism we
don't have to go back to ancientism
talk about very much the same thing they
have a monotheistic concept of god they
also have a polytheistic
uh worldview so on and so forth now in
china
yes unless we're going all the way back
to the joe dynasty unless we're going
back to
pre-hand china thousands and thousands
of years ago
then we're basically talking let's say
for the last
2 500 years in china to use a nice round
number
we are talking about a china where they
do have
this abstract monotheistic idea of god
tien they also have the concept of
particular gods particular demigods
particular demons
and then there's the lively competition
between buddhism
which is either gradually or suddenly
imported from india
on more than one route depending on
which theory you subscribe to about how
how exactly buddhism between buddhism
and then this variety
of indigenous philosophical and
religious tradition all of them are full
of gods all of them are full of
supernatural conceptions and all of them
of course
are concerned really concerned with
concepts like when you die
do you become a ghost you know like
people cared about this stuff you see it
throughout
literature when i started studying
things
ancient and asian i became a kind of
expert
in places like laos cambodia
thailand uh to some extent sri lanka
myanmar a lot of my stuff pretended
myanmar
and even then it wasn't like mainstream
myanmar was like northeastern myanmar
oh yeah then i got heavily into uh
indigenous people of
yunnan china these are not today
politically powerful influential
thinkers and whenever i meet other
scholars um for example to talk about
india i would always just claim look i'm
not really a specialist in india like i
only deal with india as it kind of
connects
to this other part of the world and then
within five minutes
i'd realize i know much more about
history politics and religion of india
that the other person i'm talking to
this happened to me again and again
again i was like okay at what point do i
stop
warning people that i'm not really an
expert in india because everyone else's
level of expertise is so abominably low
and yes
i am talking about people with phds i'm
definitely including people with phds
uh it's happening to me getting it again
with china
it's mind-blowing to me i mean i can't
really make excuses for people and say
well
cambodia doesn't count cambodia counts
[ __ ] i mean to me
haiti counts if you're talking about the
abolition of slavery
the history of the abolition of slavery
in haiti counts if you're talking about
european colonialism european
imperialism
the history of haiti counts the fact
that it's a small island
doesn't mean the example doesn't matter
and there are really profound lessons to
be learned from the history of haiti
that
still matter today so you know in the
same way i
value i care about cambodia and i
basically require the rest of humanity
to care also kind of how dare you you
know
remove them from the ledger of disasters
and human history we all throw around
this phrase so casually
learning the lessons of history yeah
well the verb there is learn
yeah it's hard work you know if you put
in a few hours to learn something with
the history of cambodia
it's going to enrich your life it really
is i mean that
take take some time out of your schedule
playing world of warcraft
to learn something about you'd be amazed
at just how rewarding it is
um but you know sure
you can't expect people to have even
read one wikipedia article about
the history of cambodia i get that i had
to let to live with that for years and
years and years
and then i shift into dealing with china
how is it possible how is it possible
that people are so ignorant about the
history
politics and religion of china
how is it possible that they shamelessly
and seriously advance these claims
without one google search without one
check
of a wikipedia article i i just
don't get it babe could you grab for me
uh sunzer there
in the the middle rank of the the
bookshelf look you know
what what is what is important in
history this is this is the sun's uh
no offense no i'm guessing you've never
heard of this book before
all right why why is this book
more or less important historically than
aristotle
who decided which books you read in
school and what
matters and at what point are you going
to step up take responsibility
for your own education and not just do
the reading yourself
but really reconsider what it is
that's important for a well-educated
person to have read
what's important for someone someone
like avistay profit or someone like
myself
to have read to have considered before
coming here on youtube
and fronting like you're a leader of
public opinion like you're a public
intellectual
i don't mean this in a shallow or catty
way i hope some of you
in the audience can take some positive
motivation from this
because truth is it's not hard to learn
all right i'm not i'm not even talking
about something that's as difficult to
learn
as how to do your own taxes all right
i'm talking about
having some awareness of your own
ignorance and taking
some responsibility for your own
education
preferably before you come on the
internet like this
and make a goddamn fool yourself